# BeeTool - Bee potential distribution modeling scripts

This repository has all scripts necessary to run create the species distribution 
models (SDM) for the bee species. 

## Usage

After cloning this repository on your computer, open the project in RStudio. 
This will trigger the automatic installation of all dependencies. If the 
installation of dependencies does not occur automatically, you need to 
first install the `renv` package and then execute: `renv::restore()`.

On `config.yml` file most of the modelling parameters are set. Change them as 
needed, but default values are the current used.

The `preprocessing.R` file takes an occurrence file for a given species and 
performs duplicate record removal. In this context, a duplicate record implies 
that the occurrence is within a distance equal to or less than the configured 
resolution parameter. The script also creates an Area of Interest (AOI) for 
modelling. The AOI is generated by selecting Terrestrial Ecoregions with at 
least one species presence. After executing the script, the AOI region and 
de-duplicated occurrence files are created. Open a terminal window to execute
the script as follows:

```bash
$ Rscript preprocessing.R {occurrence_file.csv}
```

> `[!TIP]
> Naming the occurrence file with a species code is suggested to ensure clear 
> information in the output files.

The `fit_model.R` script receives as argument the folder where the AOI and
de-duplicated occurrence files were saved. The script will do the modelling 
based on the parameters in `config.yml` file, this include which covariates will
be considered. As and output of the scripts the following products will be 
available:

- A `Maxent_models.Rds` files were the MaxEnt fitted models were saved.
- `enmeval_results.csv` file withe some model evaluation statistics.
- Raster files with name `ENM_prediction_M_raw_*.tif` which correspond to the models 
  with minimal AIC.
- Binary raster files under `binary_output` folder for different cutting levels 
  based on minimal suitability, or 5% or 10% percentiles as threshold suitability.
  
All the generated data should be reviewed to verify that the results are 
plausible.

Finally, the `future_proj.R` script, can be called using the same folder where 
all the fitted results were stored

```bash
$ Rscript future_proj.R output/{sp_code}
```
to generate a future climate conditions model. As output raster files with 
future projected model will be generated.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> All model outputs should be manually inspected for consistency.

## Data Sources

The project utilizes the following datasets:

- **WWF Terrestrial Ecoregions of the World:** Terrestrial Ecoregions of the 
  World is a biogeographic regionalization of the Earth's terrestrial 
  biodiversity.
  
  - [Dataset Link](https://www.worldwildlife.org/publications/terrestrial-ecoregions-of-the-world)
  
- **WorldClim version 2.1:** WorldClim is a database of high spatial resolution 
  global weather and climate data.
  
  - [Dataset Link](https://www.worldclim.org/data/worldclim21.html)
  
- **ECOAB - Bee occurrences dataset:** Curated bee occurrences dataset.

## Credits and Acknowledgments
The author of this scripts and analysis are (in alphabetical order):

* Juan M Barrios <juan.barrios@conabio.gob.mx>
* Carlos Cultid <carlos.cultid@inecol.mx>
* Oscar Martínez <saldeift@gmail.com>
* Remy Vandame <remy@ecosur.mx>

Some parts of the code was take from  
[ModelosDarwinUICN](https://github.com/jmbarrios/ModelosDarwinUICN) written by
Juan M. Barrios <j.m.barrios@gmail.com> and 
Angela P. Cuervo-Robayo <acuervo@gmail.com>.

